[Unknown]: I. V. M.
[Amit Varma]: You're sitting at a table with eight other people.
[Amit Varma]: All of you have chips in front of you.
[Amit Varma]: Those chips represent money.
[Amit Varma]: Together, those chips on the table constitute a small fortune.
[Amit Varma]: Four cards are laid on the table face up.
[Amit Varma]: You have two cards in your hand.
[Amit Varma]: So does another person, whom you have come to hate in the last five minutes.
[Amit Varma]: You are all playing poker.
[Amit Varma]: We've reached what is known as a turn, and this is the biggest part of your life.
[Amit Varma]: Your opponent has just gone all-in.
[Amit Varma]: The room is air-conditioned, but you're sweating profusely.
[Amit Varma]: You think for a while, and finally decide to call.
[Amit Varma]: You sigh with relief when he shows his cards.
[Amit Varma]: You have two pair, a much better hand than him.
[Amit Varma]: He only has a flush draw.
[Amit Varma]: He will win this hand less than 20% of the time.
[Amit Varma]: If the river is anything but a club, you will win a huge pot.
[Amit Varma]: There is enough money here to take you on a long luxury holiday in the Bahamas.
[Amit Varma]: Then, the one remaining card, the river, is opened up.
[Amit Varma]: Your opponent screams like a madman.
[Amit Varma]: What was a great decision moments ago, seems like a terrible one.
[Amit Varma]: Welcome to the club.
[Unknown]: Welcome to The Seen and The Unseen,
[Unknown]: our weekly podcast on economics, politics and behavioral science.
[Unknown]: Please welcome your host, Amit Badma.
[Amit Varma]: Welcome to The Seen and The Unseen.
[Amit Varma]: I used to be a professional poker player for a few years,
[Amit Varma]: and since leaving the game,
[Amit Varma]: I've believed that the lessons I learned from poker were very applicable to life.
[Amit Varma]: I've often spoken about poker with a close friend of mine,
[Amit Varma]: Mohit Satyanand, who is an ace investor and is known for his expertise in stock markets.
[Amit Varma]: He now sits on the board of several companies,
[Amit Varma]: he's an angel investor, and he also manages money in the stock markets.
[Amit Varma]: Now, whenever I talk about poker with him,
[Amit Varma]: he'd always remark at how similar it was to stock investing.
[Amit Varma]: So much so that we've just decided to write a book together
[Amit Varma]: about the similarities between poker and the stock market
[Amit Varma]: and the lessons they hold for life itself.
[Amit Varma]: So I've invited him on the show today so we can talk about exactly that.
[Amit Varma]: Mohit, welcome to the show.
[Guest]: Thanks, Amit.
[Guest]: So, poker, stocks and life or poker, stocks and lies?
[Amit Varma]: Well, I mean, aren't they the same thing?
[Amit Varma]: Okay.
[Guest]: No, I like to think that there's more than lies to life.
[Unknown]: More than lies to life.
[Unknown]: I agree.
[Guest]: Yeah, this is quite interesting, Amit.
[Guest]: What you're really implying is that firstly,
[Guest]: the decisions may turn out to be wrong
[Guest]: because there are probabilities to life.
[Amit Varma]: There's no certainty except death.
[Amit Varma]: You're referring to the story of the hand.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah.
[Guest]: But that you've got to take the right decision
[Guest]: and the right decision doesn't necessarily have to turn out right.
[Guest]: It's a question of assessing the odds
[Guest]: well in advance of taking the decision
[Guest]: and things may turn against you sometime.
[Guest]: So, I like to think that the feedback loops of developing judgment
[Guest]: in the stock market probably take a little longer
[Guest]: and a little more detailed understanding,
[Guest]: more factors than a game of cards.
[Guest]: But I could be wrong there because I don't know the poker.
[Guest]: But the broad parallel still remains.
[Amit Varma]: Let me tell you how it is in poker.
[Amit Varma]: When I started playing poker,
[Amit Varma]: one of the first things you learn is not to be results-oriented.
[Amit Varma]: Now, someone from the outside may say,
[Amit Varma]: what the hell does that mean?
[Amit Varma]: Of course, you have to be results-oriented in anything
[Amit Varma]: to know whether you're doing a good job or not.
[Amit Varma]: But poker happens to be a game,
[Amit Varma]: what I call a game for the long term
[Amit Varma]: in the sense that, let's say, let me give you a simple example
[Amit Varma]: which has nothing to do with poker.
[Amit Varma]: Let's say you have a coin which is absolutely evenly weighted
[Amit Varma]: and someone offers you a bet that,
[Amit Varma]: listen, every time we spin that coin,
[Amit Varma]: if it's heads, I'll give you 51 paise,
[Amit Varma]: if it's tails, you give me 49 paise.
[Amit Varma]: Now, I know the coin is evenly weighted,
[Amit Varma]: so it's a no-brainer.
[Amit Varma]: I will keep betting on heads.
[Amit Varma]: Now, the thing is, that is a correct decision to bet on heads
[Amit Varma]: and in the long run, I'll make a lot of money.
[Amit Varma]: But in the short run, there could be five tails in a row.
[Amit Varma]: In fact, over a long enough sample size,
[Amit Varma]: you're bound to have even a hundred tails in a row
[Amit Varma]: if you have millions and millions of iterations.
[Amit Varma]: And what happens often in poker is in similar situations
[Amit Varma]: when you have the analogue of five tails in a row
[Amit Varma]: or ten tails in a row, people get disheartened
[Amit Varma]: or they start betting on tails,
[Amit Varma]: which conforms with another fallacy
[Amit Varma]: we'll discuss later in the show.
[Amit Varma]: Which is why we are taught that, you know,
[Amit Varma]: just focus on making the right decision
[Amit Varma]: given the information available to you and your judgment.
[Amit Varma]: And in the long run, the results will come.
[Amit Varma]: But if you focus on results, then you'll end up all wonky.
[Guest]: Absolutely right.
[Guest]: So in the stock market, we say that in the short run,
[Guest]: the stock market is a beauty contest or a popularity contest.
[Guest]: But in the long run, it's a weighing scale,
[Guest]: which is the same thing.
[Guest]: What it means is that in the long run,
[Guest]: the performance of the company on objective criteria,
[Guest]: which is primarily its ability to generate cash,
[Guest]: is what matters.
[Guest]: In the short run, and sometimes that short run is fairly long,
[Guest]: what seems to matter is extraneous factors
[Guest]: which drive the popularity of a stock,
[Guest]: which could be some so-called famous investor has backed it
[Guest]: or some famous promoter has just set up this business
[Guest]: or a particular sector is a fad.
[Guest]: So if you look at that, you could think of the dot-com era of 99
[Guest]: and how it crashed and so on.
[Guest]: But in the long run, there is an objectivity to it.
[Guest]: And your skill as an investor is determined by your ability
[Guest]: to get under the hype, the positive or the negative hype,
[Guest]: around a stock and try and analyze objectively, firstly,
[Guest]: the sector that you're investing in,
[Guest]: what kind of developments that sector is likely to face
[Guest]: in the medium term in the economy in which you're investing
[Guest]: and thirdly and most importantly,
[Guest]: the ability of the management,
[Guest]: your assessment of the ability of the management
[Guest]: to manage that particular environment in which they're functioning well.
[Guest]: Now, these are judgments which you develop over a period of time
[Guest]: and reviewing the decisions, therefore, becomes important
[Guest]: because they refine your judgment.
[Guest]: So looking back has its value,
[Guest]: but only in so far as it improves the processes by which you think,
[Guest]: improves the number of factors which you analyze
[Guest]: to try and improve your ability to predict an outcome.
[Guest]: But just because the outcome is not positive
[Guest]: doesn't mean that the process was wrong,
[Guest]: doesn't mean that the decision was wrong
[Guest]: and doesn't mean that you will be right 100% of time.
[Guest]: Because the other eternal truth in the stock market is
[Guest]: that if you never lose money in a stock,
[Guest]: you're not taking enough risky bets.
[Amit Varma]: Absolutely. And I guess, you know,
[Amit Varma]: a classic example of this to my layman mind is that
[Amit Varma]: you know that there's a bubble going on
[Amit Varma]: and you know that at some point the market is going to crash.
[Amit Varma]: So obviously the smart thing is to bet on it crashing
[Amit Varma]: and to, you know, short stocks or whatever.
[Amit Varma]: But like that famous saying goes,
[Amit Varma]: the markets can stay irrational longer than you can stay solvent.
[Amit Varma]: And in that case, you might be making the correct decision
[Amit Varma]: and you might be making the correct call,
[Amit Varma]: but the results simply aren't with you.
[Guest]: Well, so there are at least three ways of looking at this.
[Guest]: This is something which anybody who's been in the markets long enough
[Guest]: has developed some kind of views on how to manage it
[Guest]: because you've been through it a few times.
[Guest]: So let me tell you a little story,
[Guest]: which is that in 1999,
[Guest]: there was this development of the IT sector, right?
[Guest]: And in those days, I was living in the mountains
[Guest]: and I wasn't really cognizant of all that was going on.
[Guest]: My stockbroker asked me to buy this unknown company called Infosys.
[Guest]: So I valued my stockbroker's advice.
[Guest]: He told me how the company was extremely well governed, etc. etc.
[Guest]: So I bought the stock at 3,500 rupees.
[Guest]: Two weeks later, when I next had access to the newspaper,
[Guest]: I saw it was 4,500 rupees.
[Guest]: When I went down to Delhi next, it was 6,500 rupees.
[Guest]: And this time I sat down for the first time
[Guest]: and actually started looking at the income statements and so on.
[Guest]: Now, my objective analysis told me
[Guest]: that a proper valuation of the stock at 6,500 rupees
[Guest]: would require it to see its income go up by 50% per annum for the next 10 years.
[Guest]: No stock I knew had ever done that.
[Guest]: And so I realized it was time to sell.
[Guest]: My broker said,
[Guest]: Sir, ye toh 10,000 rupee jaayega.
[Guest]: I said, it may be 12,000. Please sell.
[Guest]: Now, in January, four months later, the stock was 11,000.
[Guest]: But by December of the next year, it was 1,000.
[Guest]: So the question is, did I take the right decision or not?
[Guest]: Should I have waited and gotten out?
[Guest]: Now, this is a very simple way of looking at it.
[Guest]: The question you raised, if I knew it was a bubble,
[Guest]: is it enough to exit the stock or should I try and short it?
[Guest]: The answer is, it's right to short it.
[Guest]: But the second question that follows is, how much should I short?
[Guest]: Should I bet the bank on shorting it?
[Guest]: Answer, no.
[Guest]: Because if the market stays foolish longer than I can stay solvent, I'm broke.
[Guest]: So then you have to manage your funds
[Guest]: and say that I will bet a maximum of 2%, for example,
[Guest]: of my net worth on shorting this particular stock.
[Guest]: And then I think there's a parallel with poker.
[Amit Varma]: Absolutely. I mean, which is something I was going to come to.
[Amit Varma]: But to sum up what we've already spoken about,
[Amit Varma]: and it's sort of there in the Bhagavad Gita where Lord Krishna says,
[Amit Varma]: don't worry about the fruits of your action, just do the right thing.
[Amit Varma]: And that kind of focus on process over results is something that you see,
[Amit Varma]: for example, in modern day sports.
[Amit Varma]: It's very much the philosophy of the current Indian cricket team.
[Amit Varma]: I mean, Virat Kohli himself believes in it
[Amit Varma]: and would therefore perhaps be a good poker player.
[Amit Varma]: But to come back to the point you've just come to,
[Amit Varma]: I mean, this is absolutely critical, which is bankroll management.
[Amit Varma]: You know, it's not enough to take the right decision.
[Amit Varma]: You have to take the right decision under the understanding
[Amit Varma]: that you're going to get unlucky a lot of the time
[Amit Varma]: and the right decision is going to lead to the wrong result.
[Amit Varma]: And only over a certain number of iterations or a large enough sample size,
[Amit Varma]: whether it's a period of time or a number of hands,
[Amit Varma]: are you actually going to be profitable.
[Amit Varma]: And you have to make sure you stay solvent through that.
[Amit Varma]: So in poker, I mean, the term we use for that is, of course, bankroll management.
[Amit Varma]: And in poker, it's very critical that you don't play beyond your means.
[Amit Varma]: You know, if you have a bad run and you get broke, that's the end of the story.
[Amit Varma]: And players are advised to, you know, that if you're entering a certain game,
[Amit Varma]: your total bankroll should be a certain multiple of whatever the buy-in is.
[Amit Varma]: Or if you're playing tournaments,
[Amit Varma]: your total bankroll should be a multiple of your average buy-in and so on and so forth.
[Amit Varma]: And the same concept, I think, applies to pretty much anything in life.
[Amit Varma]: Absolutely.
[Guest]: And, you know, interestingly, this is true not just of shorting the market
[Guest]: or taking positions in the forward market.
[Guest]: It's also true of getting into stocks which are willing to hold for the long run.
[Guest]: And then it applies in a slightly different way,
[Guest]: which is that you buy a stock for all the good reasons
[Guest]: and the stock goes down 20 or 30 percent.
[Guest]: And obviously, you really look at the process by which you made the decision.
[Guest]: And if you realize that you didn't factor something in, something has changed,
[Guest]: then the intelligent thing is to exit.
[Guest]: But perhaps we should talk about exits separately.
[Guest]: The question then is that the popularity contest,
[Guest]: which is a stock market in the short run, has taken the stock down.
[Guest]: But your weighing scale is telling you that the stock is even more attractive today
[Guest]: because it's available at a cheaper price.
[Guest]: Now, the intelligent thing to do is to buy more of the stock.
[Guest]: But you can only do that if you've managed your cash balances properly.
[Guest]: Otherwise, you're all in and there's nothing more to put into the stock.
[Guest]: So, managing the cash you have, how much you hold in reserve to buy fresh stocks
[Guest]: is a talent which you acquire only gradually as a stock investor.
[Amit Varma]: And, you know, one of the things I wanted to do over the years was,
[Amit Varma]: you know, as I was playing poker from before that I was a columnist,
[Amit Varma]: I'd read about economics and I got deeply interested in behavioral economics.
[Amit Varma]: And it turned out, I realized while in my years playing poker
[Amit Varma]: that a lot of the cognitive biases and the faults and the wavy things,
[Amit Varma]: so to say, the bugs in the machine that is our brain are very applicable to poker.
[Amit Varma]: So, and I always thought that it would be fascinating to sort of write a book
[Amit Varma]: about the parallels, about how they impact poker.
[Amit Varma]: And now we are writing one together where a lot of them will feature.
[Guest]: So, why don't you throw some of those cognitive biases at me?
[Guest]: Tell me how they work in poker and I'll tell you how they work in stock market.
[Amit Varma]: Done. So, the first one is the sunk cost fallacy.
[Amit Varma]: Now, the sunk cost, I'll again define these terms formally.
[Amit Varma]: The definition of a sunk cost is a sunk cost is any past cost
[Amit Varma]: that has already been paid and cannot be recovered.
[Amit Varma]: And the sunk cost fallacy says that individuals commit the sunk cost fallacy
[Amit Varma]: when they continue a behavior or endeavor as a result of previously invested resources.
[Amit Varma]: Now, a real world analogy of this is that let's say I pack lunch at home
[Amit Varma]: and I take it to my office. And then when I'm in office,
[Amit Varma]: we find out that there's an awesome Japanese restaurant has a 50% discount
[Amit Varma]: and everyone wants to go there. And then I say, no, but hey,
[Amit Varma]: I've got lunch back from home, it will be wasted. But that is,
[Amit Varma]: that lunch is a sunk cost and the effort that's gone into it.
[Amit Varma]: The question I should really ask myself is what would I really value?
[Amit Varma]: What would be a good way to spend my time and my money?
[Amit Varma]: And very often, if you get past the sunk cost fallacy, you'll go and have the Japanese meal.
[Amit Varma]: And in poker, the way it applies is that let's say you are in a hand
[Amit Varma]: and you start with a good hand and, you know, you put a lot of money in the hand.
[Amit Varma]: But in a later state, you begin to feel that, hey, I may not be good.
[Amit Varma]: But purely on by dint of the money that you already put in the pot,
[Amit Varma]: you say that, hey, no, I've put, I've invested so much money in the pot.
[Amit Varma]: I can't let it go. I will go till the end.
[Amit Varma]: And you end up putting, throwing good money after bad and losing a lot more.
[Amit Varma]: And of course, you have to take the money in the pot in account
[Amit Varma]: when you're calculating pot odds and so on.
[Amit Varma]: But somehow, sometimes it's simply negative EV to continue at any cost.
[Amit Varma]: But because you've already committed so many chips, you commit the sunk cost fallacy.
[Guest]: By EV, you mean expected value.
[Guest]: Expected value. Absolutely.
[Guest]: So my favorite real life example, please indulge me, is when I go and see a movie with my wife.
[Guest]: And in 20 minutes, I say, this is horrible. I can't watch this movie.
[Guest]: And she said, no, but we paid for it. We're going to watch it till the end.
[Guest]: So I try and explain to her the sunk cost fallacy.
[Guest]: But she thinks I'm just being as clever as you.
[Guest]: Do you finish every book you start reading?
[Guest]: No, I don't. No, I'm a good student of economics.
[Guest]: I believe in the sunk cost fallacy.
[Guest]: So in the stock markets, this is very important.
[Guest]: So to give you an example, you know, when the current government came in, in 2014,
[Guest]: there was a feeling that they would focus on infrastructure.
[Guest]: The infrastructure markets were very, very badly beaten down for various reasons,
[Guest]: one of which had to do with the crash of 2008.
[Guest]: But a lot of people felt that Modi was going to focus on infrastructure and they got in.
[Guest]: And to some extent, I followed that idea.
[Guest]: I didn't throw a lot of money behind it, but I did throw something behind it.
[Guest]: But a couple of years later, when I looked at those kind of stocks that were in my portfolio,
[Guest]: it was clear that they were not performing well.
[Guest]: And this is where I began to diverge from somebody whom I taught this thesis through with
[Guest]: and we'd made sort of parallel investments.
[Guest]: And I said that from objective measures, which is, for example, interest rates.
[Guest]: Interest rates were expected to crash hugely and that would facilitate investments in infrastructure.
[Guest]: The fall was quite moderate and more importantly, looked like they were bottoming out.
[Guest]: They were now going to start going up.
[Guest]: That bankruptcy mechanisms, even though thoughts had come into place, were not fully resolved.
[Guest]: So that thesis had not played out the way it was.
[Guest]: And I remember what this chap told me.
[Guest]: He said, but I have bought a lakh shares in this company.
[Guest]: As though that changed the nature of the reality in any way.
[Guest]: It didn't, because neither Modi nor that company,
[Guest]: nor anybody cared whether he had a lakh shares or a crore shares.
[Guest]: The thesis was not working out.
[Guest]: So I took that haircut, exited those stocks.
[Guest]: And I think that day was the bottom point of performance of my portfolio.
[Guest]: I accepted the sunk cost, accepted the fallacy and exited.
[Guest]: And this is something which every investor at some point in time has got to learn how to do.
[Guest]: Otherwise, you just keep waiting for this mirage to happen.
[Amit Varma]: In fact, it's not just individuals who make this mistake with regard to investments.
[Amit Varma]: Even governments do the same.
[Guest]: Governments are a lot worse.
[Amit Varma]: About three episodes ago, we had an episode on behavioral economics with Nidhi Gupta,
[Amit Varma]: who works at the Takshashila Institution.
[Amit Varma]: And the example she gave of the sunk cost fallacy was the government's continuing investments
[Amit Varma]: in companies like Air India and PSUs, which have already lost so much money.
[Amit Varma]: But the sense is, hey, we've already sunk so much money into this, we can't let it go now.
[Amit Varma]: And they sink in more good money after bad.
[Amit Varma]: And in that case, of course, it's our good money after our bad money.
[Amit Varma]: So that's kind of ironic.
[Amit Varma]: The next funder from behavioral economics, the endowment effect.
[Amit Varma]: Now, the endowment effect is a hypothesis that people value a good or service more
[Amit Varma]: once a property right to it has been established.
[Amit Varma]: Let me simplify this and give you an example of a classic study that was carried out
[Amit Varma]: in the early 1980s by Daniel Kahneman, Jack Nash and Richard Thaler.
[Amit Varma]: Kahneman won the Nobel Prize a few years ago, Thaler won it this year.
[Amit Varma]: And in this study, they handed out mugs at random to half the people who were taking part in the study.
[Amit Varma]: And then they told those guys to sell it, to put a selling price to it.
[Amit Varma]: And they told the other lot, whom they call the buyers, to bid for it.
[Amit Varma]: And what inevitably happened was that the price that the sellers quoted was twice,
[Amit Varma]: if not more, of what the buyers were willing to pay, which was completely irrational.
[Amit Varma]: But what it showed was that once those people who had been randomly given the mugs actually owned those mugs,
[Amit Varma]: they began to value it more than the people who didn't have the mugs in question,
[Amit Varma]: which is the endowment effect.
[Amit Varma]: So, for example, if you ask a group of friends, hey, what car should I buy?
[Amit Varma]: You will find everyone sort of recommending the car that they drive because now that they have it,
[Amit Varma]: they will rationalize their choice and value it much more than they otherwise should.
[Amit Varma]: And similarly, if you ask a group of friends, what phone should I buy?
[Amit Varma]: They are very likely to recommend the one they own.
[Amit Varma]: And in poker, this is a great risk because people will often start with the starting hand,
[Amit Varma]: which looks really beautiful and, you know, and continue with it longer than they should have.
[Amit Varma]: Like if I'm not in a hand and someone asked me advice that,
[Amit Varma]: Bhai, mere paas jacks tha and it was a 10 high blow and I thought I'm good and then this was the action.
[Amit Varma]: And at some point you say, hey, you're clearly not good, just fold.
[Amit Varma]: But when you're in the hand yourself, you become too attached.
[Amit Varma]: You get married to the hand, as they say.
[Amit Varma]: And you can't let it go and that's the endowment effect right there.
[Guest]: Absolutely. And, you know, firstly, to some extent in the stock market,
[Guest]: I see some kind of merging of the endowment effect and the sunk cost fallacy.
[Guest]: Secondly, for me as an investor in publicly listed companies,
[Guest]: I often say that I'm so much better off than the owner or the promoter of a company
[Guest]: because I don't or should not suffer from the endowment effect.
[Guest]: This is not a business that was given to me by my father and therefore I have to continue to run it.
[Guest]: I can take a cold-blooded decision and exit that stock.
[Guest]: It's also aided by the fact that I don't have a liquidity problem.
[Guest]: I own a quarter or a tenth or a hundredth of a percent of that company.
[Guest]: That guy owns 50 percent. He can't offload it.
[Guest]: So, in the stock market, endowment can be completely suicidal.
[Guest]: And the fact that you're not endowed with that stock in the sense of getting it from your grandfather
[Guest]: gives you the ability to be completely objective about it.
[Guest]: And getting wedded to a stock because you had it for five years,
[Guest]: because it did well in the past or whatever,
[Guest]: is a sure way to underperform in the stock markets.
[Guest]: I believe that every quarter or every year or whatever kind of periodicity you look at your stocks,
[Guest]: you must very cold-bloodedly look at whether you are willing to buy that stock at that price or not.
[Guest]: And it doesn't matter whether you've held it for a year or ten or fifteen.
[Amit Varma]: And I would say that a lot of people who commit the Sunkost fallacy and fall for the endowment effect
[Amit Varma]: probably also suffer from the Dunning-Kruger effect.
[Amit Varma]: Which is what?
[Amit Varma]: Let me define this for you.
[Amit Varma]: The Dunning-Kruger effect is a cognitive bias wherein people of low ability suffer from illusory superiority,
[Amit Varma]: mistakenly assessing their cognitive ability as greater than it is.
[Amit Varma]: For example, let me give you an example of this.
[Amit Varma]: A famous survey was done recently where people who drove cars were asked how good their driving skills were.
[Amit Varma]: And some 94% of the people said they were above average.
[Amit Varma]: Which of course is impossible because average is average.
[Amit Varma]: Most people on average are average. 94% of the people can't be above average.
[Amit Varma]: And another name for this is, for a similar sort of effect, not exactly this,
[Amit Varma]: is the Lake Wobegon effect which comes from, you know, Garrison Keillor had created this fake town called Lake Wobegon
[Amit Varma]: where, quote, all the women are strong, all the men are good looking and all the children are above average, unquote.
[Amit Varma]: And I often see this in poker where if you're at any poker table, you'll find that most of the players,
[Amit Varma]: if not all of the players, think that they are better than the rest, think that they have an edge.
[Amit Varma]: That's why they're there in the first place. And the truth is in poker especially most of them don't.
[Amit Varma]: I mean, 8 out of 9 players are probably losing players.
[Amit Varma]: And one reason for this is they don't know enough about the game and aren't self-reflective enough
[Amit Varma]: to know how much of the game they do not know.
[Amit Varma]: And the flip side of this, of course, often is that,
[Amit Varma]: the flip side of this is that people who are genuinely competent or good at something underestimate their skills.
[Amit Varma]: Partly because they think, hey, if it's easy for me, it must be easy for the other guy.
[Amit Varma]: And partly because the more you, you know, the old cliche, the more you know about a subject,
[Amit Varma]: the more you realize how much you still have to know.
[Guest]: So, you know, Amit, I see this completely.
[Guest]: But I don't understand how people can do this in something as serious as the stock markets.
[Guest]: Because if you are into the stock markets at all, then it should be a fairly significant portion of your net worth.
[Guest]: Now, this is real because we live in an economic society.
[Guest]: And at the end of the day, you're doing this because you want your money to earn superior returns.
[Guest]: To what? You've got to define to what?
[Guest]: To fix deposits or to putting the money in an ETF or to putting it in a mutual fund.
[Guest]: So, you've got very, very clear benchmarks.
[Guest]: And as far as I'm concerned, I've reduced that also to a very, very simple heuristic,
[Guest]: which is that this is my benchmark.
[Guest]: My benchmark is, let's say, the nifty.
[Guest]: I don't want to get too sophisticated about risk-adjusted returns and so on.
[Guest]: My benchmark is the nifty.
[Guest]: I've told myself, and the best way to make sure that you do what you told yourself
[Guest]: is to share it with a couple of other people.
[Guest]: So, I've shared this with my wife and I've shared this with my sister.
[Amit Varma]: And now all the listeners of the seen and the unseen.
[Guest]: Yes, which is that if for two consecutive years I do not beat the nifty,
[Guest]: I'm going to stop managing my money because the objective numbers are telling me
[Guest]: that you cannot outperform the benchmark.
[Guest]: And therefore, why put yourself through this agony of managing money,
[Guest]: looking at the quotes every day or every hour or every minute,
[Guest]: depending on how obsessive you are about it, and give it to somebody else to manage.
[Guest]: So, if you're playing the occasional hand of poker and you're playing it at stakes
[Guest]: which don't really matter to your back pocket, I can understand it.
[Guest]: But in the stock market, where you're investing a significant portion of your personal
[Guest]: and your family's net worth, you can't afford to do something like that.
[Amit Varma]: I think the Dunning-Kruger effect is not something that is applicable in some activities and not in others.
[Amit Varma]: I think it's just a human tendency.
[Guest]: No, no, no, I understand that completely.
[Guest]: I understand that what I'm saying is that you should not allow it to happen.
[Guest]: It's more difficult to assess my good looks or my driving ability.
[Guest]: There are no objective realities.
[Guest]: Here, this was my starting net worth.
[Guest]: This was the amount of money that I took out of my equity pot or put into it.
[Guest]: And this was my end result.
[Guest]: It just requires two minutes on a spreadsheet to tell you whether you beat the index or not.
[Amit Varma]: Absolutely, and this also then creates a paradox and something that you need to balance
[Amit Varma]: because on the one hand, you create these objective benchmarks of performance
[Amit Varma]: to guard against the Dunning-Kruger effect.
[Amit Varma]: But at the same time, as we mentioned in the start of this episode,
[Amit Varma]: we shouldn't be too results-oriented, more process-oriented.
[Amit Varma]: So the deal there is that you should be process-oriented and not look at short-term results.
[Amit Varma]: But you should set yourself certain parameters over a certain sample size,
[Amit Varma]: whether it's a number of hands in poker or a period of time in investing.
[Amit Varma]: You can then look at the figures and, you know, be cold-blooded in judging whether you're doing that or not.
[Guest]: Absolutely, I think that's a very good point.
[Guest]: So, you know, when a friend comes to me and says,
[Guest]: I am now 27 years old and I need to start investing money for the future,
[Guest]: and what kind of return will I make?
[Guest]: I issue a couple of cautionaries.
[Guest]: The first is that, look, building a portfolio is a very, very difficult task
[Guest]: because I know that in the long run the stock is going to do well,
[Guest]: in the short run it may not.
[Guest]: And when the base is very small, both in terms of number of shares,
[Guest]: the number of companies that you're investing in,
[Guest]: and the amount, the fluctuations can be very violent.
[Guest]: So you must be prepared for that volatility in the short run.
[Guest]: But over a 2-3 year time period it all works out.
[Guest]: And then you take the call whether you can manage this kind of volatility
[Guest]: and whether these returns work for you or not.
[Guest]: So you're absolutely right.
[Guest]: I'm not taking that call on a daily basis.
[Guest]: And in fact, it's those who take that kind of call on a daily basis,
[Guest]: like mutual fund managers, for example,
[Guest]: who run into problems by measuring too frequently.
[Guest]: You've got to measure over a time span which is long enough.
[Amit Varma]: So, you know, speaking of mutual funds,
[Amit Varma]: I once wrote a very interesting post explaining the survivorship bias,
[Amit Varma]: if I may call it an interesting post myself.
[Unknown]: So it had the following thought experiment,
[Amit Varma]: which has nothing to do with either poker or investing.
[Amit Varma]: Let's say that you are someone who bets on cricket.
[Amit Varma]: And one day you get an email from me that says,
[Amit Varma]: I'll tell you the result of the next India-Australia match.
[Amit Varma]: And if I am right, and you don't have to pay me anything now,
[Amit Varma]: just wait and watch what I do.
[Amit Varma]: And you wait and watch what I do and I get it right.
[Amit Varma]: And then I get it right for the second match.
[Amit Varma]: And for the third match, I say, if I get it right in this one,
[Amit Varma]: you pay me for the fourth one, and so on.
[Amit Varma]: And by the fifth one, you're paying me good money.
[Amit Varma]: Now, how the scam works is that I will write to 1000 people
[Amit Varma]: and tell them I'm going to predict the result right.
[Amit Varma]: And to 500 of them, I tell them India will win,
[Amit Varma]: the other 500 say Australia will win.
[Amit Varma]: And then for the next game, for the 500 who now are beginning to trust me,
[Amit Varma]: I make it 250-250.
[Amit Varma]: And so on down the road till there are, you know, 50 people
[Amit Varma]: for whom I've got 4-5 matches right in a row
[Amit Varma]: and they're paying me big money because they've made big money off of me.
[Amit Varma]: And all this time, it's not my skill.
[Amit Varma]: They think it's my skill, but it's sheer dumb luck.
[Amit Varma]: And similarly, and this is...
[Guest]: And the law of large numbers.
[Amit Varma]: And this is what you'd call the survivorship bias.
[Amit Varma]: And this is something that can also apply to mutual funds, right.
[Amit Varma]: For example, mutual funds that seem to have a good result over a period of years.
[Amit Varma]: It doesn't mean that they're skillful or that it was, you know,
[Amit Varma]: that their judgment is particularly good.
[Amit Varma]: It can just be the case that out of a basket of like 30 mutual funds
[Amit Varma]: with different strategies, one can just by pure chance
[Amit Varma]: get this amazing, seemingly amazing streak.
[Amit Varma]: And while that streak is inevitable, like you said, the law of large numbers,
[Amit Varma]: to the outside investor who's sitting on the outside,
[Amit Varma]: it seems like, wow, these guys really know what they're doing.
[Unknown]: I'm going to put my money there.
[Amit Varma]: And this is sort of the survivorship bias which comes up in
[Amit Varma]: the context of poker in different ways.
[Amit Varma]: But is this something that you've thought about
[Amit Varma]: or that you see a lot in the stock market?
[Guest]: Yeah, I've thought about it.
[Guest]: So one way in which it operates, of course, is between two people
[Guest]: who invest in stock markets on the side.
[Guest]: And they'll only tell you about the company which went up 100x
[Guest]: and they'll never tell you about the companies that bombed
[Guest]: or they didn't even cover the cost of 4% savings deposit and so on.
[Guest]: So that's one form of it.
[Guest]: And you get very enticed by it.
[Guest]: You know, on this mutual fund side,
[Guest]: what is not true of the US,
[Guest]: which is that mutual funds beat the index.
[Guest]: In a developed market like the US, they don't actively manage.
[Guest]: Mutual funds do not beat the index.
[Guest]: And therefore, there's a huge move into passive funds
[Guest]: which just track the index.
[Guest]: In India, there have been fairly significant mutual funds
[Guest]: which have beaten the index for very, very long periods.
[Guest]: And if you make the effort of looking at what they said
[Guest]: 15 years ago and 10 years ago and 5 years ago,
[Guest]: you find a certain logic, a certain strategy,
[Guest]: a certain ability to analyze the companies
[Guest]: and the economy around them.
[Guest]: I think it goes a little bit beyond survivorship.
[Guest]: And there's something that has caused a lot of people to think very hard.
[Amit Varma]: My case isn't that everyone who's successful is necessarily merely lucky.
[Amit Varma]: But I'm just saying that as an investor,
[Amit Varma]: you should have that discernment when you make those judgments about
[Amit Varma]: are these guys simply lucky?
[Amit Varma]: Am I just getting impressed by these specific numbers?
[Amit Varma]: Or is there something more to it?
[Amit Varma]: Absolutely. Absolutely.
[Guest]: All that I'm saying is that from my perspective,
[Guest]: as an investor who has consistently beaten the index
[Guest]: for well over a decade,
[Guest]: this has intrigued me.
[Guest]: How have some stock market mutual funds done that?
[Guest]: And I find that there is a depth of thinking
[Guest]: which has allowed them to do it.
[Guest]: And it goes beyond the law of large numbers.
[Amit Varma]: So let's move on to a slightly simpler tendency,
[Amit Varma]: which is the availability heuristic.
[Amit Varma]: Now let me define this for you.
[Amit Varma]: The availability heuristic is the tendency to overestimate
[Amit Varma]: the likelihood of events with greater availability in memory,
[Amit Varma]: which can be influenced by how recent the memories are
[Amit Varma]: or how unusual or emotionally charged they may be.
[Amit Varma]: What we also call the recency phenomenon.
[Guest]: The recency effect.
[Amit Varma]: And the poker example of this is that,
[Amit Varma]: and you'll often see the good players do this, right?
[Amit Varma]: A good player will get to the table
[Amit Varma]: and when stacks aren't very deep,
[Amit Varma]: he'll play a little wild and he'll show down two or three bluffs.
[Amit Varma]: So when he really has a big hand and the stacks are deeper,
[Amit Varma]: he can extract a lot more value
[Amit Varma]: because his victim will just remember that,
[Amit Varma]: oh, this guy has shown down a couple of bluffs
[Amit Varma]: and therefore he must be bluffing.
[Amit Varma]: And that's the availability heuristic at work.
[Guest]: Yeah. So, you know, this is what we call in the Hindi language
[Guest]: of the businessman, tezi mein tez aur mande mein manda.
[Guest]: I didn't understand that, but it sounds great.
[Guest]: Well, what it means is that when stock markets are going up,
[Guest]: everybody thinks they're going to continue to go up.
[Guest]: And when they're going down,
[Guest]: everybody thinks that they're going to continue to go down.
[Guest]: And one of the favorite stories around this
[Guest]: is that when your shoeshine boy starts giving you stock tips, it's time to get out.
[Guest]: You know, so these are all manifestations of the same thing.
[Guest]: And seasoned investors know that there is this phenomenon.
[Guest]: And so you have someone like Warren Buffett saying
[Guest]: the time to buy is when there's blood in the streets.
[Guest]: So you recognize that.
[Guest]: And this takes a certain courage of conviction
[Guest]: and knowing that you're not, for example, buying too early.
[Guest]: You know, seasoned investors are not too concerned about timing.
[Guest]: Doesn't mind being a few months off, a couple of quarters off.
[Guest]: But this is exactly what leads to boom and bust is the recency phenomenon.
[Guest]: This is exactly what happened in 1999.
[Guest]: It's why if I sold Infosys at 6,500, somebody bought it.
[Guest]: And somebody also bought it at 10,500 and it never saw that price again.
[Guest]: It took 11 years to recover to that price.
[Guest]: And if you actually look at the numbers,
[Guest]: you'll find that the maximum number of transactions
[Guest]: in that stock happened on the day on which its price was the highest.
[Guest]: That's the recency phenomenon in full flow.
[Amit Varma]: Which tells you a lot and which actually takes us on to our next funda
[Amit Varma]: which is kind of related to this, which is the gambler's fallacy.
[Amit Varma]: And that's defined as the tendency to think that future probabilities
[Amit Varma]: are altered by past events when in reality they are unchanged.
[Amit Varma]: I mean, the classic example of this is you ask someone the question
[Amit Varma]: that let's say I flip an evenly weighted coin and it comes 10 heads in a row.
[Amit Varma]: And what's the probability that the 10th time will be ahead?
[Amit Varma]: And of course, that's as you know, it's 50% because the coin doesn't have a memory.
[Amit Varma]: And the gambler's fallacy is like if you're at a roulette wheel
[Amit Varma]: and it comes red five times, you say, oh, black is due.
[Amit Varma]: Or you use the availability heuristic and you commit the same fallacy,
[Amit Varma]: but a different version of it. And you say, oh, five reds in a row.
[Amit Varma]: It's a hot streak. Next one is going to be another red. Either ways.
[Amit Varma]: I mean, they're both sort of different sides of the gambler's fallacy.
[Amit Varma]: But assuming, not recognizing that every event is sort of fundamentally
[Amit Varma]: independent of what happened previously and nothing or nobody is due per se.
[Amit Varma]: Now, you know, it's like a poker context could simply be saying that,
[Amit Varma]: you know, this time I will hit a flush draw.
[Amit Varma]: You know, while the probability of hitting a flush draw is the same as what it is.
[Amit Varma]: It's completely independent of what might have happened in the past.
[Amit Varma]: Or, yaar, aaj mera luck nahi chal raha hai, you know, and so on and so forth.
[Amit Varma]: Do stock market investors also show versions of the gambler's fallacy?
[Guest]: So, you know, in a sense, this is the obverse of the recency phenomenon, right?
[Guest]: And it tends to happen a lot less than the recency phenomenon.
[Guest]: I'll tell you why. Because when we look at the stock markets,
[Guest]: what we must realize is that if you look at the universe of investors,
[Guest]: people are only putting a fairly small portion of their net worth
[Guest]: or their savings into the stock markets.
[Guest]: So, what starts happening when the stock markets start going up
[Guest]: is because of the recency phenomenon.
[Guest]: After a year or two of what we call a bull run, which is when prices are going up,
[Guest]: their wealth advisors, their wife, their uncle, their son start saying,
[Guest]: you know, there's so much money being made in the stock markets,
[Guest]: you need to put more money in.
[Guest]: So, more money starts coming into the stock market.
[Guest]: That money, given a certain restricted supply of stock, starts driving prices up.
[Guest]: So, you start having more and more movement of money into the stock markets.
[Guest]: Now, because of the phenomenon of mutual funds,
[Guest]: some of this starts becoming less fluid money.
[Guest]: It's more rigid money. It's more structural.
[Guest]: So, in India, for example, we have this phenomenon of SIPs,
[Guest]: Systematic Investment Plan.
[Guest]: So, what now happens is that a guy who's making a lakh of rupees a month,
[Guest]: he tells his bank every month to put 5000 rupees into this mutual fund.
[Guest]: That money starts becoming sticky.
[Guest]: And this means that the recency phenomenon starts to dominate.
[Guest]: And therefore, the number of people who actually start taking the opposing view is very few.
[Guest]: There are only the people who are outside of this.
[Guest]: So, you don't see too much of it.
[Guest]: You do because people will say,
[Guest]: Oh, you know, stock markets have been going up for eight years.
[Guest]: They've never gone up eight years in a row.
[Guest]: Now, they've got to crash.
[Guest]: So, you do see some of that.
[Guest]: And I think that's equally lazy intellectually
[Guest]: because you need to look at what's happening in the economy,
[Guest]: what's happening globally.
[Guest]: There can be fund flows coming from abroad due to a whole variety of factors.
[Guest]: So, you can't be lazy about it.
[Guest]: There is this tendency.
[Guest]: All I'm saying is that this, to my mind,
[Guest]: is not as important a fallacy in the stock markets
[Guest]: as the recency one.
[Amit Varma]: Right.
[Amit Varma]: And let's move on to sort of, I mean, we could just go on forever.
[Amit Varma]: But let's do that in our book.
[Guest]: We might do, you know, a follow up to this episode someday a few months from now.
[Amit Varma]: But for now, let's end with one more, which is a pretty powerful one.
[Amit Varma]: Which is loss aversion, which is defined as
[Amit Varma]: people's tendency to prefer avoiding losses to acquiring equivalent gains.
[Amit Varma]: And the way I think of it is, you know, in poker terms,
[Amit Varma]: it simply means that, and every poker player will know this,
[Amit Varma]: that losing X amount of money causes greater pain
[Amit Varma]: than winning X amount of money would.
[Amit Varma]: And this is, therefore, something that even haunts profitable players
[Amit Varma]: because I was, throughout my time as a cash game player, profitable month on month.
[Amit Varma]: But being profitable in cash games typically means
[Amit Varma]: taking four steps up and three steps down,
[Amit Varma]: four steps up and three steps down.
[Amit Varma]: And the emotional pain of the three steps down
[Amit Varma]: is always much more than the joy of the four steps up.
[Amit Varma]: And you can rationalize and say that, look, I'm profitable month on month
[Amit Varma]: and these big losing sessions are inevitable and so on.
[Amit Varma]: But yet they cause a lot of pain.
[Amit Varma]: You know, in the stock market, this can, for example, make people risk averse
[Amit Varma]: because they're scared of losing and so on and so forth.
[Guest]: So I'll tell you how this, there are many manifestations of these,
[Guest]: but let me look at the one which I find particularly poignant,
[Guest]: which is related to the point that I just made about
[Guest]: people entering the stock market because of the recency phenomenon.
[Guest]: And obviously the later they are into it,
[Guest]: the less chances that they make money
[Guest]: because they could be coming in,
[Guest]: they could be the guys who are buying Infosys at 10,500 rupees
[Guest]: just the day before the dot-com bust happens.
[Guest]: What's really poignant about this is that
[Guest]: if you look at a long enough term,
[Guest]: in India, the stock markets beat any other form of investment.
[Guest]: They beat fixed deposits, they beat gold.
[Guest]: It's a little moot whether they beat real estate or not.
[Guest]: So let's not go there, but they certainly beat investments
[Guest]: in bank deposits, in fixed deposits or in gold.
[Guest]: What happens, however, is that if people enter late
[Guest]: because they are entering at the end of a boom phase
[Guest]: which is inevitably followed by a bust,
[Guest]: they say stock markets create losses
[Guest]: and they exit and it takes them, if ever,
[Guest]: 10 or 15 years to recover.
[Guest]: So they have lost the opportunity to grow their net worth
[Guest]: substantially over their productive phase
[Guest]: which is 35 years of saving,
[Guest]: catering for your retirement.
[Guest]: The answer is actually very easy
[Guest]: which is that you look at long term data,
[Guest]: you look at it objectively
[Guest]: and you say, you prepare yourself for losses.
[Guest]: You say that there will be a year or two when there are downturns
[Guest]: but I'm getting into the market
[Guest]: knowing that these downturns will happen,
[Guest]: I'm prepared for them.
[Guest]: And when you actually discuss it with people in your family,
[Guest]: you tune yourself to it, there are people to remind you
[Guest]: because it's not easy.
[Guest]: It's not easy as a fixed income earner
[Guest]: to have put two years of savings in the stock market
[Guest]: and to see it lose 30 or 40 or even 50%
[Guest]: as it happened twice in the last 10 years,
[Guest]: 17 years, sorry, from 1999 to now.
[Guest]: So you had the crash of 2000
[Guest]: and you had the crash of 2008.
[Guest]: So twice you could have seen your investments
[Guest]: go down by 40 or 50%.
[Guest]: It's not easy.
[Guest]: But if you've looked at the data,
[Guest]: you've looked at the stock market
[Guest]: as a way of creating wealth
[Guest]: over a career of saving and preparing,
[Guest]: then you know that this is going to happen.
[Guest]: So you can inure yourself to loss aversion
[Guest]: by the same method,
[Guest]: the same process of going back to long term data
[Guest]: and saying this is not a casino,
[Guest]: I'm not betting on making money this year,
[Guest]: I'm betting on creating wealth over a long period.
[Amit Varma]: I think beating these cognitive biases
[Amit Varma]: and becoming good at either poker
[Amit Varma]: or investing in stock markets
[Amit Varma]: requires both a certain degree of self-reflection,
[Amit Varma]: the willing to be critical of yourself
[Amit Varma]: and to recognize these so-called bugs
[Amit Varma]: in the machinery of your brain
[Amit Varma]: and a certain amount of hard work.
[Amit Varma]: On that note,
[Amit Varma]: we'll have to put in some hard work
[Amit Varma]: to get our book together.
[Amit Varma]: Thank you so much for coming on the show, Mohit.
[Amit Varma]: My pleasure, Amit.
[Guest]: I look forward to that hard work of writing.
[Amit Varma]: Good evening, ladies and gentlemen.
[Unknown]: This is your captain speaking.
[Unknown]: Sorry to say but there's been a slight delay
[Unknown]: due to the apocalypse having suddenly begun.
[Unknown]: As you can see,
[Unknown]: there's death, destruction and chaos taking place
[Unknown]: all around us.
[Unknown]: But don't you worry,
[Unknown]: food and drinks will be served shortly
[Unknown]: and I would recommend checking out
[Unknown]: IVM Podcasts
[Unknown]: to get some of your favorite Indian podcasts.
[Unknown]: We'll keep you going till this whole thing blows over.
[Unknown]: Thank you.